Transcribe: 
Notebook 139, covering 9 to 18 June 1968 (CCCC14/6/2/1/139)

Link to text file to edit:
https://github.com/Cambridge-Digital-Library/Crowdsourcing/blob/master/transcription/oliver-rackham/MS-CCCC-00014-00006-00002-00001-00139.txt

Link to images of original:
https://cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/view/MS-CCCC-00014-00006-00002-00001-00139

-----

[cover]

[10469]

9 June 1969
Childerley cont.

The extinct village in the Great Park is a series of earthworks in permanent pasture.  Surrounded by great elms of the procera type, including one row along a possible hollow way.

In the N. part of Grove Park, around the pond and ditch of 354617, are faint indications of habitation -- shallow earthworks and patches of nettles.  The area has been plonghed and resown not long ago.

June 11
Hayley Wood.

The large Carex in the coppice plots is flowering this year and turns out to be C. acutiformus.

[10470-10471]

Polyponus sulfureus.  A fine sporophore on a fallen oak. [SYMBOL]

The word is very dry after a short drought.  No standing water in the coppice plots.  Some signs of drought in maple.  There is still one wet patch at the bottom of Hayley Ditch.

Of the large crab trees in the coppice plots, the one with three stems carefully preserved in 1967 has died.  

Conopodium is flowering along Hayley Ditch Ride.

Crowns of each one still very thin, especially standards and promoted trees in the coppice plots.  

Ash has been somewhat in this year's coppice plot on stools unprotected by thorns, but those which were protected have got off to a good start.

Cirsium paluote is coming up in the 1967 plot.  

[10472-10473]

1968/1 Thlaspi anvenue - Elmstead market
/2 Vicia tetrasperma (not kept)
/3 wind.  (not kept), also /4, /5
/6 Ceninthe minor -- river gravets, Inglostadt.
/11 Onsbrychis sp., roadside near Ivanic Grad (not kept) 19/6
/13 Ilmus minor, grave near Markovas (Serbis) 19/6
/14 Verloascum lychnitis, roadside near Markovac, 19 June
/12 Cousolide regalis sop paniailata roadslide near Ivanic Grad, 18 June
/15 Centaurea sostitichis, roadside near Paracin, Serbia, 19 June
/16 Bronus rectorum, roadside near Vranje, Serbia, 19 June

[10474-10475]

June 12.
The Onopordon has reached 5 1/2 ft high -- probably not quite the maximum.

The surviving Eccremo carpus has made much growth and is flowering.

June 13.
Botanistic Gardens.  
Agave sp.  One at the side of the plant-houses is flowering, very rarely.  An enormous asparaguo-like young infl. about 7ft high.

Beschhorneria yuccoides.
A remarkable monocot with a bascal rosette of lanceolate leaves which is flowering this year as it does very rarely.  Infl. about 7ft high, a stout vermillion stem with alternate branches bearing clusters of pendent yellow and green floweres about 3/4 in long.  It looks wilted.

[10476-10477]

Helicoclieros muscivones () Engl.
(Corsica, Baleaerics).  An avoid with a remarkable pedate lead having 3 large lobes and two small ones attached to the outer pair.

Phormium tenax.  Flowering.

June 14.  
Sempervivens. 
See photographs.
1.  S. tiroliensis x styniacum.  A massive stem about him high with many leaves rather like those of the rosette.  Flowers about 12, each about 14 sepals and petals, much larger than S. arachnoideum.  There is only one rosette, which has flowered after many years' vegetative growth.

Related to either S. Wulfenii or S. Pittonii.

2.  Egnesengrat.  One infl. with 5 flowers, each about 7-mersuo.  Apparently an ordinary S. montanum.

The Onspordon grown in a tub is now nearly in flower.  5 1/2 ft high, will probably grow a few inches more.  [SYMBOL]

The gourds ar estill a long way from flowering.

June 15.
Cambridge -- Hamwich.

Holly is abundant near Little Bently, between Colchester and Hanwich.

The country E. of Colchester is markedly acid, in contrasts to the rest of Essex seen.  Edge of a field near Cold Hall, Great Bromley: Solanium dulcamara (im ditch)

[10478-10479]

Ranunculus scleratus (ibid.)
Spergula arvensis
Arabidopsis
Teucrium

Around Halstead are some mighty elmo (apparently carpinifolia) with very elegant pendulous twings from the edge of the crown and from the bole.

Cornflowers are abundant in a rye field near Leuven.

June 16.
Osted -- Ingolstadt.
Flanders appears to have been formed by the rising of the land.  No obvious sea walls except within a few miles of the coast.  The E. edge slopes gradually into the hills.

Most of flades as seen so grazing marshes with some low hills.  Small woods of Populus canadensis.  

There is a mixed wood (perhaps planted) containing pieces on one of the hills near Ghnet.

The N. of Liege province is a hill country with bocage, woods, and sibljak on the warmer slopes.

Around Aachen are areas of elm woodland.

Between Aachen and Colin are woods of beech with oak and birch, probably in sands.

Lilium olartagon was seeen on the motorway cutting

[10480-10481]

near Siegburg.

On the shales S. of Siegburg is a very mixed woodland including oak, pine, spruce, beech.  A small area of apparently recent Costanea coppie was seen.

Cultivated lupino are naturalized above Henwich.

Above Coblewich are small areas of Congis and Caspinus coppice much neglected and mixed with other trees, possibly remnants of old simple coppice.

Near Siegeburg is a small town with many box-frame buildings usually 2 1/2 storeyed without werhangs.  

Montabaur is an ancient town with a castle on a wooded hill.

Liuburg has a large cathedral rather like that at Meutz, but with an octagonal crossing tower.  It stands on a fortified bluff in the middle of the town.

The woods between Limburg of Weisbaden are very extensive.  Almost pure beech, uneven-aged or even-aged in regeneration patches.  Very close and with few other species.  No understanding save young beech.  Little ground vegetation.

The woods on the Main levels between Wiesbaden and Hanace are a mosaic of Scots pine and oask Much of the pine appears to be

[10482-10483]

of wartime origin.  The oaks do badly and are mainly stag-headed, even though probably quite young.

Spe Bart is a district of rolling hills of a soft red sandstone.  Unexpectedly it has many dry valleys both large and small.  Forests are a mosaic of oak, beech, pine, and occasional birch and spruce.  Oaks often stag-headed.

Sun-scald is severe on the trunks of beeches on the side of the new motorway near Esselbach.

There is much sibljak ad scrub on rocky motorway cuttings and abandoned farmland on steep S. facing steps in Spe Bart.

In the Esselbach area are numerous field sustems with contour strips, many now disused, a few terraced.

There are surface exposurse of limestone (apparently quite thin) on the hills S.W. of Wurzberg.

Limestone exposures in the Wurzberg bend of the Main arc are more massive and have thermophilous vegetation on warm scarps incl. Luctuca semola and Connilla varia.  Vines are grown in a few places on S. and S.W. exposed hill sides, grown on posts in vertical rows.

Onion tower near Kilziagen

[10484-10485]

Geischoind is a stone town with roofs of tiles thus: [DIAGRAM]

Steiger Wald is a disected plateau with mainly dry nettings.  Mainly arable in open-field systems.  Woodland patchy, pre-dominantly pine, some spruce and beech.  Regeneration in small or medium clearings.  No understorey.

In Steiger Wald the oaks (whether in valley bottoms or elsewhere) are closely grown, small with short horizontal branches.  Nearly always dead n the crown. 

[DIAGRAM] Qirobur

The Frankish Jura (highest point a few S.E. of Kinding) is a hilly country with numerous scarps and deep dry valleys.  The rocks are a white limestone with more prominent bedding planes then most of the Jurassic.  Few natural cliffs.  FOrest mainly spruce.

[10486-10487]

June 17.  Inglostadt --> Trebesing.

Forests on Danube gravels, Acuworldsee, Inglostadt.

Mainly Pirnus sylvestris mature trees.  Other spp: 

Populus canesceus (also young ones)
Ilia cordata
Prunius padus (young)
No understorey.
Flowers (where not disturbed) mainly *thistle.  Carduus personata [SYMBOL]

In disbturbed areas these occur *Cerinthe minor [SYMBOL]6
*Lithospermium officinale [SYMBOL]7
Ants remarkably few.
No stinging nettles.
Remarkably free of mosquitoes.

[SYMBOL] discarded because mistreaten

ZELTPLATZ INGOLSTADT

Woolly aphis occurs on lonicera xylosteum in the delta of the Grope Ache (E. Warren).

Grotze Ache woods

Almus glutinosa -- treated as large coppice and forming stools up to c. 2ft. Polesto c. 40ft high.

Spruce freq. of similar height.

Ash poles freq.
Paris
Primula elatior
Valeniana offic.
Oxalis aceto.
Nepeta olechome
Privet
Caltha

[10488-10489]

Gem urtarium
Carex of acutiformis (sterile)
Ox remota
Rubus caes
Athyrium f.f.
Loruicera xylosteum

Radstadter Tavern

Sycamore abundant down to Unter Tavern.  Trees of all ages up to c. 2ft diam.  Much overgrown with mosses but no large lichens seen.

This road was in exerable condition largely unsurfaced, and badly damaged in the 1966 floods.
No Zirm was seen.
Most of the valleys are rich pastures and the mountains forrested to the top.  
The Klaschtbergoafs is similar but easier to cross.

Lamium album and Geranium phesum are abundant by the road at Tweng.

This road (over the Radsadter Tavern) has four milestones at least said to be of Septimius Severus: two on each side of the Tavernpafz.  They are round monoshiths about 4ft high and 1ft diam.

[10490-10491]

Apparently made of the same schist as the mountain in general: laid with the cleavage planes vertically.  One examined closely was circumscribed.

[DIAGRAM]

TYPE of fence common in the Radstatter Tavern area.

Gimund.  A place is return is, [DIAGRAM] a tiny medieval walled town, with the Klafchtberg, Spittal, and Malta gates.

Trebsing.  A delightful camp site on a grassy hillside under fruit trees.

Hallein.  A small town much like Hall, with well-kept massive old houses with tapering walls and vaulted groundfloors.  Overlooked by the Barmfteine, two limestone pinnacles crowned with trees.

June 18.  Trebesing-Slavronski brod.  

ZELTPLATZ TREBESING

[10492-10493]

There was a fairly severe thunderstorm in the night of Tresbesing.

The Ratece paces from Tarvis to Podkoren is an imperceptible saddle in a big valley.  There are coniferous woods and grasslands.

Further down, the Sara dolsoka valley becomes a narrow glen overlooked by the steep and thickly forest crags of Slcrlatica.

The road from Jesenice is Ljubljana cuts across the winding old road which is reserved for bicycles and cattle.

[SYMBOL]9 Teline monopeosulena - disused railway, Podkoren
[SYMBOL]10 ?Tragopugon sp. ibis - discarded.

Corn-cockle is abundant in a field of rye near Mojstrana.

Goosupljsko polje.

Undulating rather than flat-botoomed, tho' with flat arms.  Many internal hills and spurs.

Sections show a much fissured gray limestone, such face generally smooth but with small solution holes in places.

Well-marked terra rossa.  

Woods patchy, a mixed mosaic of conifers (chiefly spruce) and decidious (oak, hornbeam, beech, perhaps Ostrya and Q. pubescens).

[10494-10495]

Wood near Jvanske gonca.  Slope about 20 degrees facing N.  Limestone rocks projecting -- largely covered with forest.  Probably even-aged 1-storied wood.  Largest trees c. 9 in. dia.

Spruce } dominant
*Beech }
*Quercus robur } freq. 
Carpirus bet.  }
*Acer camp. occ
*Occ. regeneation from seat.

Some beeches grow from one-cut storls.

Herbs include:
Primula?  elat or (leaves not very clearly demarcated at base)
Melampyria sylv. (yellow and purple) freq. at edge
Frcigaris vesca
Platenthera bifolia (one seen)
Oxalis
Vacain. mystillus (growing on sutty soil very close to rock: some in early fruit)
Crnus sanguin
Asarium (viab, not flowering)
Gentiana asclepiadea v.ab.
Sanicula loc.
Ox sylvat
Bracken
Sambucus ebulus

Waterer's Spiracea is apparently naturalized on the earthworks of the Ljubljana-Zagreb road.

The E. part of Ljubljamsko

[10496]

barje is all meadows with no sign of peat cutting.

Many S. faicng hills are terraced between Visna gova and Trebnje.

Between Visna gora to Trebrye people were selling baskets of toadstools to motorists in various places.  Apparentl Lecairum carpina.

Krakovska gozd (on the river terraces of the Kuka) is mainly oak and Pinus sylvestis very uneven-aged, mixed and mogeit, with several other spp.  There are large irregular sharp-eged arces of treeless fern. 

[back cover]

