Transcribe: 
Notebook 138, covering 25 May to 9 June 1968 (CCCC14/6/2/1/138)

Link to text file to edit:
https://github.com/Cambridge-Digital-Library/Crowdsourcing/blob/master/transcription/oliver-rackham/MS-CCCC-00014-00006-00002-00001-00138.txt

Link to images of original:
https://cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/view/MS-CCCC-00014-00006-00002-00001-00138

-----

[cover]

[10433]

1986
May 25.  A flowering Authriscus plant dug up a few days ago has been successfully transplanted without my wilting or check to growth or flowering.

May 26.  There is a blue-tit's nest outside my rooms in Fanshawe House in the avity of a cast-iron lamp standard.  [DIAG] This is of the usual late-victorian type with a hole in the top, which acts as the entrance.  Although faicng upwards, it is protected from rain by the lantern above.  Two birds enter by the space

[10434-10435]

between the lantern and the top of the standard.  Visits (probably to the young) are by one bird only, at intervals averaging about a mnute, though on one occasion there were three visits within a minute.

A terrapin was observed motionless (apart from frequently changing the position of its head) on a rock about 1ft out of the water at the Gardens.  It did not move when approached to within c. 3ft.  It stayed there for at least 1/2 hour.  The head has an acute "prow" and the back legs sharp claws.  The shell is very low and very muddy.  Slightly bigger than Nickey.  Cypripedium is flowering very well this year.

May 27.  The cold spell for the last 3 weeks or so appears to be ending.  Bluebells and horse-chestnuts have remainedin flower for an unusually long time.  The Paosifloras of martket origin are just starting growth but that from Notcults is still delayed.

May 28.  The first Saponaine ocymoides flowers opened.

May 29.  Iponea began germinating.
May 30.  22 ornamental gourd and 12 Cobeca candens seeds were sown in tubs.

[10436-10437]

May 31.  Sauromatum guttatum (Bot. Gourd).  See p.442.

[DIAG]

Knapwell Wood.  Srellania holostea near entrance 
Festuca gigantca 
Atridicum indul.  occasional frequent

Malus.  One tree of the cultivasted ssp was seen on the S.W. edge of the wood.  The wild ssp is fequent in the S.W. section.  The cuckoo was heard in this wood.  Bluebells are now nearly ovr.  Stellania holostea occurs in two places in rather small quantity: see map.

One bluebell plant was found in which each flower is subtended by a linear-lanceloate acute bract about 1m long.  Around the W. end of the main ride is a large opulation of Heracleum sphondylium in which both varities are represented.  Elsewhere in the wood only the broad-leaved occurs.

[10438-10439]

[DIAG]
Mercury rust is local.
St. h. = Stellania holostea
Orchis mascula very local and infrequent

Brackets bluebell
Elm suckers 

[10440-10441]

The wood is about as wet as Hayley would be.  Little standing water.  One coppice oak near the middle of the wood has split asunder and two trunks fallen away from the other four.  The whole wood has dense and almost continuous herbaceous undergrowth, probaby because the small coppice is absent.  

Ash canker is frequent.

The buildings of the adjoining farm are largely modern and made of imported timber.   Some are of roughly squared ash and other poles, some with bark on; this probably represents large coppice.  Most of the smaller poles in these rougher buildings are of confiers (? pine) roughly squared; this may represent the confiers shown on the O.S. map.

A large erratic about 4ft high and weighing perhaps a ton was found in the farm, where it had been used as a mounting block, and has now been set up as a standing stone in front of the farm.  It is an irregular lump of hard sandstone with numerous ferniginous concretions and a variety of shells and other fossils.  One side is very glaciated.  Various smaller boudlers exist about the 

[10442-10443]

farm.  The E.  end of the wood contains old machinery and other junk, including a pile of mercurated seed-corn which is now smouldering.  The edge of the wood is everywhere very bushy.  There has been some enroachment on the S. and S.W. sides, but probably not due to elm.

Botanical Gardens (see p.436).  Sauromatum gultatum is an outdoor avoid.  The spadix is about 6im. high.  Spathe partly in the growund.  Infl. pale green with large closely spaced plain-chocolate-brown spots.  A fine scent of jugged hare.  A terrapin was seen in exactly the same place as before (p.434).  Another jumped into the water when disturbed and paddled vigorously around, frequently coming to the surface.

There is a remarkable fascination of a scapose Primula.  It is a complete regular cylinder with flowers from the top edge.  The outside of the cylinder is smooth and naked like the ordinary scape.  There are several leaves inside, but it was not possible to see where they were attached.  On the sandstone rocks above the lake.

Othonnopsis cheinfolia (L.)

[10444-10445]

Benth. & Hook. is a dwarf shrubby composite with thickish very glauous spathulate leaves.  These are held erect and closely spaecd.  Those on any one creepy shoot are in parallel planes.  The plant as a whole is a compass plant, the greatest lead area being exposed to the S.W. and N.E., though there is considerable variation in individual shoots about this mean.

There are many ducklings on the lake which squabble over pieces of bread.

The sequoia sempervicrens is now very brown.

June 1.  Many Ipomaea seedlings and a few Treopoeolum have emerged.  The Sempervivum tiroliensis x styriacum is going to flower.  Eccremocarpos is flowering.  Of the Gentiana ascelepiadea, only two small shoots are evident.  The Cotyledon umbilicus (Lizard) is going to flower.

[10446-10447]

[DIAG] Railway NE of Haylay
L 400
Polemium sangu.
Myosois v. small fls
Rhinauthus
Cowslips frew. oak seedling cut D
SE track 1948, NE 1953 (dates on chairs)

[DIAG] Copse NE of Hayley, by railway
c.20 ft
Q Strag
Corn Strag Q

[10448-10449]

Uppper storey S alix frag treated as large coppice: occ pole oaks to c. 9 in. dia.
Canipy rather irregular
Occ ash poles
Understorey manly hawthorn
very dense and matted clear undergrowth
Apparently all crimons
Prun spin. freq
Ash rare
A few larch pl. in S.E. corner, where there is no willow.

Nettle loc. dom. c. 4ft high

*One small elm at NE corner 
Another in middle of N sine.  Diesch. rare
Tamus freq. near t/g
Gala um ap. freq
Authnsuro R
Poa tuv. loc ab.
Vovachap sylv
Ranuck rep
Niburum lant occ
Arctinum min
Rosaarb rose
Heracleum rose

Copse evidently mainly plowed, though some semi-natural scrub remains as understorey.  No typical woodland plants.  Hawthorn is monogyna.  Geraminum robertiarium grows between the rails.  Plants often very large and recalling those of the Canary Is.

[10450-10451]

On railway betw. wood k copse
Brancy p,sych
Tamus 
Myposotis arvensis
*Lirum cath. ab.
*Veron agnestis curvensis
Oak -- many saplings
*Ferhca rutra
Dactylus
Acer
Polenum sangui -- freq
[????] copse and for about 10 yars N, on same sides
Rumex acetisa
Cowslip loc. ab.
Guar [????]
Carsium pal
Leuthymus prat.
Ash saplings rare
Starby's syw
Herart.
Hlyperc. hirs.
Dandelion
Ivy rare
*Vernonica chamae
Min um und.
Potentilla rept.
Clerabtium
Rhinathus is scattered along copse and between it and wood
Galium erectum rare
Vibum lant rare
Plantago may
Picno ech. rare
*Chaenorhium?  ballast few plants
Tuss. lago
Epilot mons
--- hirs
Fragania resca
*Rumere acetrosilla
teniafolius
Dogwood loc.

[10452-10453]

Railway against Triangle.  
*Veronica agreay arvenosis
*Medicago lupul.
*Veronica chamae.
*Birch numerous
Oak seedlings
Dipsacus
*Arenania leptoclados -- ab.

Railway against Old Wood.  
Listera
*Polygala vulgaris -- NGS?
*Small-flowered Myosotis arvensis

Railway W. of old wood.
Vicia vargustifolia ab.
Chrysanth leucanth
Potonium saryuisoba vs. ab
Luerae. Poloseuth

* [composite?] Genista -- no, correct  } in small q/y against Hound c.
Valeriana                              }

Houndwood Fragment.
v: railway verge w: wood
[DIAG]
u u Q Q Q 
Platunthera

Trees 15-20 ft high
Elm is small-loaded.  *
2 poles of c. 8 in.
Oaks pioneer habit, c. 8 in. dia.
Hazel understorey
few elm sucklars

[10454-10455]

occ. crat. monogy 
Mercury ab. also on verge
Platanthera -- 4 fine plants on verge
Vibymum lentana
Gabium ap: ground dom. in places
Galerlodilon v. ab and on verge
Agnimonia eup. verge
Vicia august v
Tamus v
Acer v. x w
Several oak seedlings
Brachyp. sylv v& w
Centaurea reg.
Comus ab. in wood
Prunnus spin. in wood
Arctium in wood
Lotus com verge
*Rhinanthus freq on verge
Cirsium eno [SYMBOL] surreal plants at SW corner prob. vulgaris
Poatri v. w
Hypericum hirs v & w
Senecip enicif v
Cowslip v
Ash v. only
Bryony v & w
Vicia cracca verge
Sali x airo.  one tree in w

[DIAG] s B Q BB
cors eno [SYMBOL] [prob. vulgare]

Birch -- remce. but with some sign of hybridization

[10456-10457]

Glechoma ab in wood
Honeysuckle in w.
Valeniana occurs in wood & on verge
Rosa can in wood

About 12 fairly regular hazel stools.  No 1. c.
*Hawthorn leaves cut c. 1/2 way.  Otherwise Hawthorn mainly mono [!!!!]
See p. 460
48 paves (meas. along railway)
long c. 20 ft wide and 6 ft verge.

Mr. Cox's Corner.  Mypsotis aw. ab. within wood at this corner

Position if vehicles in wood at Mr. Cox's corner 

[DIAG]
Fence chained by 
Trolley c. 20ft long almost entirelt on the wood side of Cox's corner
Large machine of unknown purpose c. 28ft long in ditch and leaning against [????]

[10458-10459]

Solarium dulcamara in qty at s side of pond, and in pond glade

[????] flarium vigorous by pond

The S. part of the Glade ([????] prob. once) has become a dense stand of Geum wrt.  Conopodium is flowering on the wood bank near the main ride costing.  A tuft of Lacrimaria lacrimabundum was found on the N.W. ride.  The wood is rather dry.  The only standing water in the S. section is at the bottom of "Hayley Ditch".  The hollows in the coppice plots are muddy and soft but there is no free water.  The new ride is in a similar state.  The entrance bridge has been finished.

There are now no obvious differences outside and inside the deer exclosure except the density of fruiting oxlips.  The ash canopy is still some way from being closed and the buds of some trees and only just open.  

Some bits of Sedium telephiuma (severed some weeks ago by the mower making a rack through the coppice plots) are still turgid and were planted on the ground.  The sedum is not 

[10460-10461]

apparently going to flower.  There are numerous birch trees by the railway alongside the triangle, mostly repeatedly cut down and notmore than 1ft high.  They are predominantly B. pubescens.

A specimen was taken from the Littlehound hawthorn bush previously referred to.  Flowers in one umbel:
1 style [SYMBOL] 5
1 styles fused [SYMBOL] 1
2 styles free or fused at base [SYMBOL] 9

Potenium sanuisorba is extremely abundant on both sides of the railway between Hayley and the little hound Fragment.

Littlehound Fragment.

[DIAG] Site of Littlehound Wood
Littlehound fragment

Although not apparently on the site of Littlehound wood, the fragment retains several features probably derived from that wood. 
1.  Hazel coppice
2.  Suckering elm
3.  Mercury
4.  Both hawthorns
5.  Viburmum lantana
6.  Oak
7.  Platanthera

[10462-10463]

June 3.  Buff Wood.   With John Risbeth: collecting wet-wood specimens.

Big Sycamore.  15 in. 1922.
Wide '22-25
Ext wide 26-50 (40, 0.41"
41, 0.48")
Wide 51-3
V. narrow 54
Narrow 54-9
V. narrow 60
Med. 61 --
60 --5 0.08"

Multiple deaths of branches in the top, apparently done to squirrel damage.  branches upto 5" dia affected.  Bark removed usually for half the circumference but sometime girdling.  Much repair of edges, but often the repaired bark is eaten in a later attack.

Squamosus-type rot in the affected branches, but no tendency to spread and trunk quite sound.  Crown quite healthy apart from damage.  [SYMBOL]

Many branches have died some years ago and some of these are riddled with woodworm.  Very little wet-woood but in oneplace a dark brown stain with orange margins extends a few inches in from the common insertion of several dead branches.

[10464-10465]

Populus canad.  1921.
21-30 mw 12in.
31-40 w
41 --> 12 (58w)

Wet-wood up to c. 1942.  Lightly discoloured in field; later changing to deep, pinkish khaki (distinction from heartwood).  Margin sharp with slight discolouration outside.  Visible throughout the [???].  Tree c. 60ft high.  Prob. from early infection.  Slight sour smell.

This very extensive wet-wood appears to have resulted in no external effects.  It communicates with the outside only through branch crags in the middle and upper part of the tree, but has probably spread up into the snags rather than down from them.

There is no doubt that all the large populars in this section and the adjoining part of the Old Wood are Populus canadensis or a related type.  Probably even-aged.  Bark very thick, furrowed.

The smaller populars in the section are uneven-aged and undoubtedly P.tremule var. villosa.  Bark smooth for a long period with lozenge shaped lenticels, slowly becoming rough but never thick.

The species are readily distinguished on leaf characters.

[10466-10467]

Specimens taken, of which some to Herb. contab.  There are many suckers in the poplar area, but the species are not easily distinguished.  This big sycamore is the only large one in that part of the wood.  

[DIAG] Ride Sycamore Populus canad.

It was felled with a rope and in its fall demolished a stool ash (behind which I had intended to retreat).  Coppicing is now finished.

June 9.  A small Esculus carnea in the front garden of Grasshopper Lodge has suddenly wilted as the flowers were ocming out.  About 15ft high, a few yards from alarge stump with many Armillaria toadstools.

Childerley.  There are some fire hedges, rather poor in species, along the road to Childerley.

[10468]

It was not possible to see any of the struture of Honey Hill Wood.  Weatherfield Plantation is an interesting belt with a variety of trees, but probably no coppice.  The orchards are all derelict and the southern portion grubbed up.  The area around the weather-field pond is proabably interesting.

Pleurotus cornucopiodes.  Recorded at Childerley.  The childerley gardens are excellent on a small scale and particularly good in shrubs.

[back cover]
